Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy
and here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and David Carson. Joan Slonczewski is a young biochemist who
practices as a scientist and writes science fiction. She brings into her writing
another element from her life. She is a practicing Quaker. Slonczewski's first
novel bears the title Still Forms on Foxfield. We asked her to explain the origin
of the title. Foxfield is the name of the planet that was named after the Quaker
settled the planet and they named it after George Fox who was the founder of the
Quaker religion. "Still forms" is a phrase that comes from a poem by Whittier. John
Greenleaf Whittier who was a Quaker and he would he wrote a poem which described
the experience of being in a Quaker meeting and he spoke of the still forms on
either side that somehow breathed a special light and the still forms refers to
the still forms of the people who were around him in the Quaker meeting. From the
title and packaging of this novel the prospective reader might assume it is
strictly a soft science book. On the contrary the novel has a good deal of hard
science woven in with good characterization. Slonczewski's aliens the Commensals
are well drawn they are sentient mobile plants that communicate by emitting and
detecting volatile chemicals. We discover that Slonczewski came up with these
aliens while in the laboratory. Listen to her describe her thoughts. In my
scientific work I've studied chemical communication among bacteria and it was
sort of of interest to me supposing you could have an an alien intelligence that
would communicate chemically uh through through things like pheromones almost um
how would this work? would it be possible? And I tried to think what kind of of
creatures these might be and and how they might work in different ways than our
usual vertebrates, mammals, humans, and so on, and so it occurred to me they might
have developed from plants for for instance. Uh they they might use something
akin to plant hormones. Before Slonczewski could write Still Forms on Foxfield she
had to find a way to incorporate these aliens with the Quakers who were to be
the human characters. And I also was getting much interested in into into into
Quakerism I guess at a slightly later date and the two things finally meshed
together and that was really the key to to the book was when I was able to
combine those two ideas the idea of the aliens and the Quakers and how they
would interact and at that point that's when it became possible to move ahead
with the book. It seems unbelievable at first that science and Quakerism can mix
so easily. Here Slonczewski explains a bit about Quakerism and how for her the
combination works the religion is basically christian it developed from um
during the Protestant Reformation it was one of the Protestant branches but at
the same time it has become very universal as it has developed and Quakers today
see a great affinity with other somewhat universalist religions such as Buddhism
for example and I made that parallel in my book also. And it is also a religion
which scientists often find congenial because of the emphasis on the experience
of the individual in science you you test the universe by making experiments. Uh
Quakers test the spiritual universe by meditation and and an inward seeking of
truth an almost an inward type of experiment. Join us next time when we continue
our talk with author Joan Slonczewski.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson and Bill Vernon.
We are continuing our series on science fiction author,
Joan Slonczewski.
Slonczewski carries the credentials of being a practicing scientist and a devout Quaker.
She is uniquely qualified to comment on the treatments of science and religion in science fiction.
We asked her her view on the presentation of religion in science fiction.
I'm disappointed that it hasn't been treated more.
I think that it has been, where it has been treated, it's often been treated very well.
Heinlein's Stranger in a Strange Land is a very controversial treatment of it, but
in a way it made people think about the issues and that was good.
What disappoints me more is that
often writers seem to create universes in which religion does not exist at all.
You see, I think you don't necessarily have to write a book about religion,
but it seems almost dishonest to write about a world where it doesn't exist because it's such a
prevalent part of life. And often it's prevalent in ways that you simply don't realize.
For example, I'm a scientist, my father is a scientist, and yet when I was little I learned
about Adam and Eve before I learned about evolution simply because it's such a basic
part of the culture. And a lot of us often don't realize how basic it is and how we revert to it
in a crisis, such as a death in the family, things like that. And in
science fiction, very often people are portrayed in the far future with the idea
that simply religion has died out and there's no more need for it anymore.
Whereas I find that to be an unrealistic portrayal. It seems to me that there
always will be people who will need religion, that it's a basic part of the
human experience and that science is never going to completely replace that for
people. Slonczewski has read a great deal of science fiction. We asked her what
she watches out for when she reads a book featuring scientists at work. What I
have my eye on really is the interaction between science and people. And that's
the one thing that I think is the sign of an outstanding writer, is the one who
can really show how science operates in real life, not how we would like it to
operate in a fantasy life. I think Heinlein is, of course, the ideal example of
that. In most of the good Heinlein stories, he will take a look at technology
and yet show the human perspectives on it and show how ordinary people's lives
are affected. Since Slonczewski is a young writer just beginning her career, we
asked her what her advice is to aspiring writers. The most important thing in
writing is to be distinctive. And by that I don't mean outrageous necessarily,
but to find whatever you have that is unique in your experience. And at every
step of your writing, try to write something that hasn't been written before.
The second thing I would say is you just have to keep submitting what you write
because... Now, I was very fortunate that the first publisher I sent my novel to
happened to have an editor who really liked the idea and was taken with it.
That's an unusual thing.
Agatha Christie took 11 tries to get her first book published. You know, and
there are all sorts of stories like that. So I would say those are the two main
things. Try to be... To say the ordinary in a distinctive way. To write
originally. And whatever you write, just keep submitting it to publication. Joan
Slonczewski, a young scientist with great promise as a science fiction writer.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.